---
title: 'Reproducible analysis: example'
date: 2019-10-31T15:20:58+01:00
draft: false
---

Stating the obvious here, but before we can start playing around with the code we need code to play around with. As said in [last post](https://isaacverm.github.io/posts/reproducible-analysis-outline) each step in the data analysis cycle will have its own function as an example.

Concerns about how to structure this code are not relevant at the moment. First things first so we throw all the functions together in a file called `analysis.R`. This file is also used to "orchestrate" (between quotation marks since orchestration in this case is just running each function after another).

I'll go over the steps one by one.

## Import

We're using a built-in dataset so there's not a lot in terms of importing.

## Tidying

When loading the `nottem` dataset we can see the structure is like this:

```
      Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec
1920 40.6 40.8 44.4 46.7 54.1 58.5 57.7 56.4 54.3 50.5 42.9 39.8
1921 44.2 39.8 45.1 47.0 54.1 58.7 66.3 59.9 57.0 54.2 39.7 42.8
...
```

This violates the rules for [tidy data](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/tidy-data.html). The first rule says _each variable must have its own column_. There are 3 variables (month, year and temperature) but there are 12 columns (one for each month). The second rule says _each observation must have its own row_. Meaning each observation of temperature should be on its own line. There are 240 observations (data from 1920 to 1940 and 12 observations per year) but there are only 20 rows (a row for each year). Both of these constraints are not satisfied.

We'd like to end up with something more like this:

```
year    month   temperature
1920    Jan     40.6
1920    Feb     40.8
...
```

This contains the same data as the other format but in a structure more understandable to `tidyverse` packages. If we put the data in a tidy format now we don't have to worry about the formatting later on anymore since the `tidyverse` packages all assume the same format.

Tidy can be untidy because of two main reasons (and each reason has a specific solution):

- variable spread across columns
- observation scattered across rows

In this case we only have to fix the first problem. This is called gathering the data.

```
tidyNottem <- function(temperatures) {
  tk_tbl(temperatures) %>%
    separate(col = index, # index automatically generated by tk_tbl()
             into = c("month","year"),
             sep = " ")
}
```

So here I do the following:

- coerce from time series to tibble using `tk_tbl()`
- split index in month and year using `separate()`
